Let's try now.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I've taken the mic off mute, so it should
be working a bit better.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Don is not introducing me, so I'll introduce myself.
NOTE CONF
I'm Phil Wadler.
I'm a professor at the University of Edinburgh.
NOTE CONF
Some of you would have seen the lectures I gave
last week.
NOTE CONF
How many people were here for those lectures?
And who wasn't here for those, but is here now.
NOTE CONF
And who didn't raise their hand either of those times?
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So today we're going to talk about propositions of types.
NOTE CONF
Um, as you'll know, I had my hip replaced recently.
So most of the time I'm just going to be,
NOTE CONF
uh, sitting like this, but maybe I will get up
and wander around.
NOTE CONF
We will see.
Are there any questions before I start?
NOTE CONF
So if I say something you don't understand, you have
a job, which is to raise your hand and ask
NOTE CONF
a question.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We'll see how that works.
Right?
NOTE CONF
So who wants to learn the hilarious story of computability
theory?
NOTE CONF
So algorithms go back quite a ways.
There was Euclid's algorithm about 300 years BCE, and algorithms
NOTE CONF
are named for al-Khwarizmi, who came up with a few
and lived around 800 in the Christian era.
NOTE CONF
But we didn't have a formal definition of algorithm until
the early 1900s.
NOTE CONF
So around 1935, three papers come out at once Alonzo
Church's Lambda Calculus, which you now all know a bit
NOTE CONF
about.
Kurt Girdles recursive functions and Alan Turing's Turing machines.
NOTE CONF
How many people have heard of Alan Turing?
Most of you.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
So we're going to learn a little bit about the
NOTE CONF
story.
But, you know, it's a bit like buses.
NOTE CONF
You wait around 2000 years for a definition of algorithm,
and then three come along at once.
NOTE CONF
Why did this happen?
So it all goes back to David Hilbert.
NOTE CONF
He wanted what we all want, which is to put
all mathematicians out of business.
NOTE CONF
So he was, among other things, a logician, one of
the first formal logicians.
NOTE CONF
And he wrote about the entire problem, which just means
decision problem.
NOTE CONF
But it sounds much better in German.
And what that was was the idea that you should
NOTE CONF
be able to write out a formula in logic, and
then have an algorithm that determines whether you've just made
NOTE CONF
a true statement or a false statement.
So you wouldn't need people anymore to decide what was
NOTE CONF
true or false.
You could have a computer decide it.
NOTE CONF
So.
Hilbert puts this forward, and then along comes Kurt Gödel
NOTE CONF
And girdle comes up with his incompleteness theorem.
So what the incompleteness theorem says is basically what he
NOTE CONF
showed is that you could formalise in arithmetic.
So first he showed you could take any string of
NOTE CONF
symbols and encode it as a number.
So properties of strings of symbols could actually be properties
NOTE CONF
of numbers.
And then he wrote down a property of numbers saying
NOTE CONF
um, this number denotes a valid formula.
And even you give it two numbers and it says
NOTE CONF
the first number denotes a valid proof of the second
number, which is a valid formula.
NOTE CONF
So you could just have a statement about numbers that
says this statement is approved.
NOTE CONF
And it turns out that you could set it up
so that the statement itself had a number, and that
NOTE CONF
number was the number that it was the proof of.
In other words, he showed how you could write a
NOTE CONF
statement saying, this statement is you could do it for
this statement is provable, but it's more interesting.
NOTE CONF
You could also do it to say this statement is
not provable.
NOTE CONF
So you'd have a statement saying there is no number
that is a proof of this formula.
NOTE CONF
And that formula would itself have a number.
And that was the number that appeared in the formula.
NOTE CONF
Mhm.
So as soon as you can do this you're in
NOTE CONF
trouble.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Because consider the statement.
This statement is not provable.
NOTE CONF
Well there are only two possibilities.
Right.
NOTE CONF
It is provable or it's not provable.
Which is it.
NOTE CONF
Well if it's provable it says it's not provable.
So if it's provable you've proved something that's false.
NOTE CONF
So if you know anything about logic.
You know, that's a really bad idea.
NOTE CONF
You do not want to be able to prove things
that are false.
NOTE CONF
So assuming your logic is sound, meaning that everything that
you can prove in it is true.
NOTE CONF
What follows?
Well, what follows is the other one must hold, which
NOTE CONF
is, um.
It's not provable.
NOTE CONF
Oh, but it says it's not provable.
So it's true.
NOTE CONF
So you've got two possibilities.
Your logic is unsound.
NOTE CONF
Really, really bad.
Or your logic is incomplete.
NOTE CONF
There are true things that you cannot prove.
So that's not nearly as bad as being unsound, but
NOTE CONF
it's still really, really annoying.
So as soon as this happened, people began to take.
NOTE CONF
stake.
Let's go back for a minute.
NOTE CONF
As soon as it happened, people began to think, oh,
well, maybe there is no algorithm that could determine whether
NOTE CONF
anything was true or false, because what they sort of
had in mind is you just look at all possible
NOTE CONF
proofs and eventually you'd find the right one.
But now there was a possibility that was true, but
NOTE CONF
there was no proof.
So now they're beginning to think, hmm, maybe you can't
NOTE CONF
decide this.
So the race was on, right?
NOTE CONF
What they wanted to do was to show that there
was no algorithm that could determine whether a given thing
NOTE CONF
was true or false, or even provable or not provable,
which we've now learned is not quite the same thing.
NOTE CONF
So the race was on, and as long as you
were looking for an algorithm, you didn't really need a
NOTE CONF
definition of algorithm.
You just write it down and it would be just
NOTE CONF
like Justice Stewart's definition of pornography, which was I know
it when I see it.
NOTE CONF
So you look at the algorithm and go, yeah, that's
an algorithm.
NOTE CONF
But as soon as you want to say there's no
possible algorithm, then you need a formal definition of algorithm.
NOTE CONF
So you know exactly what an algorithm is.
And you can say nope, there's nothing that does that.
NOTE CONF
So the race was on.
The first to come up with the definition was Alonzo
NOTE CONF
Church.
So he was a logician.
NOTE CONF
He was not a movie star despite what he looked
like.
NOTE CONF
And church came up with ta da, the lambda calculus.
And he came up with this way of encoding numbers
NOTE CONF
as lambda terms, which I believe you've covered a bit
in class.
NOTE CONF
This is called church numerals.
And it just says, well, the number one takes a
NOTE CONF
function and a thingy and applies the function to the
thing he wants.
NOTE CONF
The number two you take a function and a thingy
and you apply the function to the thingy twice.
NOTE CONF
Number three you take a function and a thingy and
you apply the function three times and so on.
NOTE CONF
So you have this encoding of numbers, and they show
that using that encoding of numbers you could.
NOTE CONF
By the way this would be much easier if you
included zero.
NOTE CONF
But he didn't.
But he still made it work.
NOTE CONF
These days we include zero as a natural number as
well.
NOTE CONF
Anyhow, he had the encoding he showed.
It was very easy to define things like plus and
NOTE CONF
times with an awful lot of work.
His, um, PhD student Stephen Carlini showed that you could
NOTE CONF
define minus one, which was the really hard one.
Um, cleaning actually discovered this when he went to the
NOTE CONF
dentist.
When they put him under with laughing gas, he suddenly
NOTE CONF
had a vision of how to define the subtract one
function and went back to church and said this.
NOTE CONF
And church said, oh well, I'm glad you figured that
out because I was about to give up on this
NOTE CONF
lambda calculus stuff.
So now they have lambda calculus, and once they could
NOTE CONF
do all these things, they said, you know, you could
just do anything with this.
NOTE CONF
So all of the encodings that girdle did, you could
redo in lambda calculus.
NOTE CONF
And once they had a formal definition of what it
meant to compute something, they could easily show.
NOTE CONF
Well, there are some things you could define but not
compute.
NOTE CONF
And the first of these was the halting problem given
a lambda term itself, is there another lambda term that
NOTE CONF
decides if that has a normal form or doesn't have
a normal form?
NOTE CONF
So they were working with untyped lambda calculus rather than
typed lambda calculus, but the ideas are very similar and
NOTE CONF
write Lambda calculus is extremely simple.
It's the world's simplest programming language.
NOTE CONF
This is defined right before there were computers.
I referred to computer before, but computer back then meant,
NOTE CONF
um, a person, usually a woman, who would sit at
an adding machine and follow the rules that were given.
NOTE CONF
So computers were actually people.
Um, but again, you could solve a computer that would
NOTE CONF
follow an algorithm.
And this is the world's simplest programming language.
NOTE CONF
Um, back before we had electronic computers, it just has
variables, lambda abstractions.
NOTE CONF
So this stands for a function, right?
Um, take an argument x and then substitute that in
NOTE CONF
n and then compute n.
So if n was x times x then this would
NOTE CONF
be the function that squares things.
And then if you took the if L was lambda
NOTE CONF
x times x and m was three, then it would
reduce to three times 3 or 9.
NOTE CONF
So this is application.
This is defined a function.
NOTE CONF
This is a variable that was all you needed.
So this goes back to 1932.
NOTE CONF
It's the world's simplest programming language, right?
Any programming language you learn now, even Haskell, right, is
NOTE CONF
just way more complicated.
Just pages and pages and pages of definition, not three
NOTE CONF
lines.
So.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Java is another programming language.
NOTE CONF
How many people have heard of Java?
Yeah, most of you have.
NOTE CONF
It's quite widely known.
So this is Duke, the mascot for Java.
NOTE CONF
And in about a decade or so after Java first
came out, they added lambda expressions to Java.
NOTE CONF
I knew some of the people who were working on
this at the time, but basically what I like is,
NOTE CONF
you know, this is early 2000.
Look at how smug Duke looks about coming up with
NOTE CONF
something that was defined in the 1930s.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So congratulations, Duke.
You caught up with what happened 70 years ago.
NOTE CONF
So then along comes Kurt Girdle.
And he goes.
NOTE CONF
He goes to visit church, who's at Princeton, at the
Institute for Advanced Studies.
NOTE CONF
And he looks at this lambda calculus thing, and he
says the same thing that most people say today when
NOTE CONF
they see lambda calculus, which is I don't understand that.
That's crazy.
NOTE CONF
That can't be right.
And he said, and so church said, fine, you come
NOTE CONF
up with your own way of doing it.
And girdle did.
NOTE CONF
He came up with recursive functions, which is what we
use in Haskell all the time now, just a function
NOTE CONF
that's defined on itself, acting on a smaller argument.
So he had recursive functions over numbers, but you can
NOTE CONF
do recursive functions over arbitrary data types.
But just numbers was enough to capture the idea of
NOTE CONF
computability.
And so he said, this is what we should use.
NOTE CONF
And again, church's student Carlini, who I mentioned before, wrote
this down and published it with attribution.
NOTE CONF
Um, so it was first presented as a series of
lectures at Princeton, and he wrote it down, and then
NOTE CONF
cleaning and church went off, and they showed that everything
that you could do with lambda calculus, you could do
NOTE CONF
with recursive functions, and that everything you could do with
recursive functions, you could do lambda calculus.
NOTE CONF
So they were equivalent.
So they went back to girdle and said, look, you
NOTE CONF
didn't like our idea, but your idea is the same.
The tension was unbearable.
NOTE CONF
So girdle thinks about this for a while and they
says, hmm, my definition is the same as your official
NOTE CONF
inner definition.
Hmm.
NOTE CONF
Mine must be wrong then.
He just really didn't like lambda calculus.
NOTE CONF
So then along comes Alan Turing, who looks, as you
can see, very young.
NOTE CONF
He was actually a undergraduate at the time he did
this.
NOTE CONF
So if you guys are thinking of something to do
for your final year project, here's something to compete with.
NOTE CONF
You could do the equivalent of defining Turing machines.
So, um, I'm exaggerating slightly.
NOTE CONF
He wasn't an undergraduate.
He had just finished his, um, undergraduate degree at Cambridge
NOTE CONF
when he published this paper.
But he was he was basically an undergraduate.
NOTE CONF
He hadn't gone to graduate school yet.
And he publishes this paper defining Turing machines, a third
NOTE CONF
way of doing arbitrary computations.
But he did something that church did not do and
NOTE CONF
the girdle did not do.
He gave an argument.
NOTE CONF
why what a computer could do.
Remember computers?
NOTE CONF
A person sitting and following an algorithm.
What a computer could do is what a Turing machine
NOTE CONF
could do.
And he said things like, okay, we'll have squares which
NOTE CONF
act as memory because, you know, whoever is doing this
can write things down in each square.
NOTE CONF
You can write a finite number of things, he explains.
Well, why is it a finite number of things rather
NOTE CONF
than an infinite number of things?
Well, if, you know, I don't have out there, um,
NOTE CONF
he explained this very well.
He said, well, consider the numbers 99999999999999, and the number
NOTE CONF
99999999999.
You might not have noticed, but one of those had
NOTE CONF
14 nines and one had 15 nines.
And he said, look, you can't distinguish these at a
NOTE CONF
glance.
There's only a small number of things you can distinguish.
NOTE CONF
It can't be an arbitrary, unbounded number of things.
It's a small fixed number of things.
NOTE CONF
So we'll take a finite number of symbols.
You can write in each square of the Turing machine.
NOTE CONF
And he went on and so he explained why what
a Turing machine could do is what a computer could
NOTE CONF
do.
And then he sketched, um.
NOTE CONF
So they were very excited about this.
And then they discovered that they had been scooped by
NOTE CONF
church and scooped by, um, girdle.
So they were a bit upset about this, but, um,
NOTE CONF
Turing's supervisor wrote to these guys and he said, well,
what do you think?
NOTE CONF
And they said, oh no, that's enough different that that's
worth publishing to.
NOTE CONF
So they published it, referencing the other two papers and
sketching the proof that what a Turing machine could do
NOTE CONF
is the same as what lambda calculus could do, or
what recursive functions could do.
NOTE CONF
And at that point, Turing actually went off to be
a PhD student with church, and, um, did extensions, various
NOTE CONF
extensions of Turing machines, uh, and also wrote out the
detailed description of how Turing Machine could do what a
NOTE CONF
lambda term could do and vice versa.
And what I love is the.
NOTE CONF
There are many people who don't like lambda calculus.
They prefer Turing machines.
NOTE CONF
But what Turing himself said at the beginning of his
paper, maybe he was just buttering up his supervisor, but
NOTE CONF
I don't think he was the sort of guy who
would do that.
NOTE CONF
He was gay back when it was not accepted to
be gay.
NOTE CONF
But, you know, he was not in the closet.
Um, he was pretty clear about who he was, even
NOTE CONF
though it was much more dangerous to do that back
then.
NOTE CONF
By the way, has anybody seen the film The Imitation
Game?
NOTE CONF
Right.
Where they imply that because he was in the closet,
NOTE CONF
he would just, um, accede to blackmail by Germans and
basically be a traitor to his country?
NOTE CONF
Not everything you see in a movie from Hollywood is
quite true.
NOTE CONF
Anyhow, he wasn't the kind of guy who would butter
up his supervisor, but what he said in the very
NOTE CONF
first paragraph of this paper, he says, look, okay, we're
going to show lambda machine, um, lambda terms and Turing
NOTE CONF
machines are equivalent, and therefore 1st May use the more
elegant I quote Turing lambda terms.
NOTE CONF
So he actually thought lambda terms Lambda calculus was more
elegant than Turing machines, unlike many people who came after
NOTE CONF
him who preferred this very mechanical view.
Anyway, when all this happened.
NOTE CONF
Now, there was the third thing with an argument why
it was what a computer could do.
NOTE CONF
And finally girdle was convinced and gave into this.
So philosophers like to debate whether mathematics is invented or
NOTE CONF
discovered.
And what I want to claim is when you have
NOTE CONF
a hat trick, when you have three completely different definitions
that turn out to be of the same thing.
NOTE CONF
The reason they turn out to be the same thing.
It's not that these three people have very little imagination
NOTE CONF
and all invent exactly the same thing.
It's because there's the same thing out there.
NOTE CONF
It has been discovered.
So what do we learn from this?
NOTE CONF
Right?
Girdle was 28 when he basically undermined the life work
NOTE CONF
of Hilbert, who was 68.
Turing was 23 when he settled this raging argument between
NOTE CONF
church, who is 33, and girdle, who was by then
no longer to be trusted 30.
NOTE CONF
What should you take away from this?
You have an important job.
NOTE CONF
It's your job to keep explaining to your elders like
me, when we've got it wrong.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So keep that in mind.
NOTE CONF
It's your job to be setting us straight.
Okay, so that's the preface.
NOTE CONF
You now know about computability theory.
Now let me tell you a little bit about propositions
NOTE CONF
as types.
So here's Gerhard Jensen.
NOTE CONF
Um, he was also working in the 1930s, just like
Hilbert and Church and Girdle and Turing.
NOTE CONF
And in his not his undergraduate work, but in his
PhD thesis, he defined the not one but the two
NOTE CONF
main forms of logic that we use today.
And how many people have seen the upside down a
NOTE CONF
that means for.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So they had that informal logic since the very late
1800s, early 1900s, but that was written by them as
NOTE CONF
an just open and closed parenthesis.
There wasn't a special symbol for it.
NOTE CONF
So, um, Jensen thought, oh, it'd be nice to have
a special symbol.
NOTE CONF
So he introduced the upside down A to stand for
for all.
NOTE CONF
So here are his rules for one of these major
systems.
NOTE CONF
Natural deduction.
That's written a bit small.
NOTE CONF
So here are the same rules written larger I've only
written some of them.
NOTE CONF
I've written the rules for and introduction and and elimination
given here.
NOTE CONF
And the rules for implication introduction and implication elimination given
here.
NOTE CONF
I've written down the rules identically.
There's only one difference between the way he wrote them
NOTE CONF
and the way I wrote them, which is he wrote
his letters in German, and I'm writing my letters in
NOTE CONF
English.
So let's go through these rules.
NOTE CONF
So the most important thing is that unlike the earlier
formalisation of logic, such as those done by Hilbert.
NOTE CONF
His rules come in pairs and the pairs have a
very important structuring principle.
NOTE CONF
They are introduces and eliminators.
So introduction means, as you read the rule from top
NOTE CONF
to bottom.
That symbol gets introduced, right?
NOTE CONF
The symbol appears below the line, but not above.
Here again eliminators.
NOTE CONF
As you read from top to bottom, the symbol appears
above but not below.
NOTE CONF
So what does this rule say?
So you have hypotheses above the line and a conclusion
NOTE CONF
below.
So this says if a implies b.
NOTE CONF
So this backwards c it's basically c.
For consequence a implies b.
NOTE CONF
If we know that and we know A, what can
we conclude when we know A, we know A implies
NOTE CONF
B, so we know B, right?
That's a rule of logic that you've seen in this
NOTE CONF
class.
Um, how do you get.
NOTE CONF
So that's how you use an application.
How do you get an implication?
NOTE CONF
You say, well, let's assume A is true.
I don't have a proof of that, but let me
NOTE CONF
just assume A is true.
And if assuming A is true, I can prove B,
NOTE CONF
then I know that with no assumptions A implies B,
so these square brackets mean I'm assuming a.
NOTE CONF
And then this label x says I am discharging this
assumption.
NOTE CONF
So here I'm assuming A, I prove b and here
with no assumptions whatsoever I conclude a implies b.
NOTE CONF
All right.
And then conjunction written ampersand is even easier if I
NOTE CONF
have a proof of a and I have a proof
of B, I can conclude that are both a and
NOTE CONF
B, and if I know A and B, what can
I conclude?
NOTE CONF
What can I do with it?
Well, if I know A and B, I must know
NOTE CONF
A and I must know B, so you can introduce
an.
NOTE CONF
And when you know both A and B, and when
you've gotten and you can forget one half of it
NOTE CONF
and conclude the other half.
Any questions about those?
NOTE CONF
Is that clear enough?
Are you all bored?
NOTE CONF
Not bored.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Remember, it's your job to ask questions.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So let's make use of that.
Let's do a little proof.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to show you that b and a implies
a and b.
NOTE CONF
Wow.
That's completely obvious right?
NOTE CONF
Why would you even bother to prove that?
Well, the reason I want to bother to prove it
NOTE CONF
is if our rules work, they should let us prove
this.
NOTE CONF
So let's check that.
That's so.
NOTE CONF
And it'll give us a simple example of how these
rules work.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'm going to assume I want to approve an
NOTE CONF
implication.
So I start by assuming the thing that is the
NOTE CONF
argument.
The hypothesis of the implication.
NOTE CONF
So let's assume B and A.
I'm going to use that assumption twice.
NOTE CONF
And from B and a of course I can conclude
a and from b and a I can conclude b.
NOTE CONF
Well now I've got a proof of a and a
proof of b.
NOTE CONF
So I've got a proof of a and b and
I discharge my assumption, I've got b and a implies
NOTE CONF
a and B.
Any questions yet.
NOTE CONF
Now the important thing about about rules coming in pairs
is it means you can eliminate certain pairs.
NOTE CONF
So if I have an introduction and then I eliminate
I never needed to do that introduction okay.
NOTE CONF
So instead of saying assume a prove b then I
know a implies B and then give a proof of
NOTE CONF
A, and I can conclude B.
What would be a simpler way of coming to the
NOTE CONF
same conclusion?
I've got this part written with three dots and this
NOTE CONF
part with three dots.
How can I just use those without doing this?
NOTE CONF
Well, I've got a proof of a right.
So instead of assuming a why don't I just use
NOTE CONF
the proof of a.
So I'm going to simplify the proof so that instead
NOTE CONF
of assuming A and getting that to b, b I've
got a proof of a, and from that I get
NOTE CONF
b.
Now this looks like I made the proof smaller, but
NOTE CONF
in fact I might have made it very much larger
because as we saw here, you might use your assumption
NOTE CONF
more than once.
So here I've used the assumption twice.
NOTE CONF
So if my proof here of a is very big,
I might duplicate it two times or even an arbitrary
NOTE CONF
number of times, so the proof would actually get much
bigger.
NOTE CONF
Oh, let's skip that.
Okay, let's do another example.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Let's have got the introduction rule for conjunction.
NOTE CONF
And then one of the elimination rules.
So here from A and B I can conclude a
NOTE CONF
and b.
And then from the a and b I can conclude
NOTE CONF
a right.
What's a simpler way of doing that one.
NOTE CONF
It's fairly obvious right.
What's the simple way of doing this?
NOTE CONF
Proof.
You're sitting all by yourself in the middle of the
NOTE CONF
front row of the second tier.
What?
NOTE CONF
What's the way of doing this proof directly?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We've got dot dot, dot ace.
NOTE CONF
That's a much simpler way of proving a so we
can just.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Just use dot dot dot A directly.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's now we know how to simplify proofs.
NOTE CONF
Here's our little proof that from B and A we
can conclude a and b.
NOTE CONF
Here's a proof of B.
Here's a proof of A.
NOTE CONF
Here's a proof of B and a.
So by elimination um, I know b and a implies
NOTE CONF
a and b I know b and a, so I
can conclude a and b, so right.
NOTE CONF
But there's a lot of guff here that should be
able to get rid of.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because here's, um, a introducer followed by an eliminator so
NOTE CONF
I can get rid of that.
So what I do is I take my direct proof
NOTE CONF
of B and A and copy it in place of
those two assumptions.
NOTE CONF
And now I've got to do this.
And then once I've done that copy, I have an
NOTE CONF
an introduction above and an and elimination so I can
get rid of both of those.
NOTE CONF
And now for my proof of being, my proof of
a I've got a direct proof of A and B
NOTE CONF
rather than an indirect proof.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So Jensen was very interested in these pairs of things
because he wanted to show that you could always simplify
NOTE CONF
proofs.
You want to show that there were no roundabout proofs.
NOTE CONF
So he introduced sequent calculus, which is different than this.
This is called natural deduction and showed that you could
NOTE CONF
always eliminate these pairs, except in sequent calculus they're left
right pairs.
NOTE CONF
You guys have seen sequent calculus right.
You've not seen natural deduction so much Right.
NOTE CONF
Natural deduction is the one everybody else uses.
But sequent calculus is nice because it's very symmetric, and
NOTE CONF
because it was easier for him to prove this elimination
property.
NOTE CONF
So you define natural deduction to find sequent calculus proved
that they were equivalent.
NOTE CONF
And then prove that you could always get rid of
these roundabout proofs in sequent calculus.
NOTE CONF
Great irony.
He needed a roundabout proof to show there are no
NOTE CONF
roundabout proofs.
So this one that I showed you here actually didn't
NOTE CONF
come about until.
So he did that in the 1935, in the early
NOTE CONF
1960s, I think.
This will horrify you.
NOTE CONF
Roundabout.
When I was born.
NOTE CONF
Province wrote down the direct proof for natural deduction.
Okay, so that's Jensen.
NOTE CONF
Now let's look in more detail at what church did.
So church actually came up with lambda calculus.
NOTE CONF
He wasn't trying to solve the problem of computability.
That just happened on the side.
NOTE CONF
What lambda calculus was really for was to have a
compact way of doing what was important, which was writing
NOTE CONF
down formal proofs and logic.
Except it turned out that in untyped lambda calculus, you
NOTE CONF
could write things, um, that would let you prove false,
which is bad, right?
NOTE CONF
You should not have a proof of false.
So, so it was like, oh, dear.
NOTE CONF
You know, well, we can use lambda calculus for computation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, oh, by the way, church sort of anticipated that.
So he wrote this first paper on lambda calculus, um,
NOTE CONF
as a compact way of writing down proofs and logic.
But somewhere in the introduction he wrote, it may even
NOTE CONF
have applications beyond its use in logic.
So he understood that he had something interesting there, but
NOTE CONF
he wanted it for logic.
And it turned out you could write down these basically
NOTE CONF
infinite terms that let you then do proofs of false,
which you really didn't want to have.
NOTE CONF
So after inventing untyped lambda calculus, he invented ta da!
Simply typed lambda calculus and simply typed lambda calculus made
NOTE CONF
use of an idea that Russell had come up with
to avoid other paradoxes like Russell's paradox.
NOTE CONF
And so he wrote this down in 1940.
So I'm going to show you the simply typed lambda
NOTE CONF
calculus, which had the property that all terms terminated.
You didn't get these infinite terms, and you could no
NOTE CONF
longer do a proof of false.
So simply type lambda calculus was suitable as a basis
NOTE CONF
for logic.
And we will learn a little bit more about just
NOTE CONF
how suitable it was.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So simply type lambda calculus right?
We have application.
NOTE CONF
If L is a function from A to B and
m is a term of type A, then L applied
NOTE CONF
to m.
Well this is a function from A to b, so
NOTE CONF
the result will be a b right.
You use this in Haskell all the time, except you
NOTE CONF
write this funny thing as an arrow, right?
If x is a term of type A, and I
NOTE CONF
can write a term n of type b, then I
can write lambda x n.
NOTE CONF
So here x is free in n.
Here its bound in n, and this will be a
NOTE CONF
function from an argument of type a to a result
of type b.
NOTE CONF
If m is a term of type A, and n
is a term of type B, we can form an
NOTE CONF
m pair, which is an a b pair.
So we write.
NOTE CONF
In Haskell, we write m in pairs.
Just like this.
NOTE CONF
We also write the type A and B just as
a and b a comma B in parentheses.
NOTE CONF
If L is an ab pair, then pi one of
L will have type A.
NOTE CONF
We call this first in Haskell FSG.
And if L is an AB pair then pi two
NOTE CONF
of L we call this snd.
Second in Haskell we'll have type B.
NOTE CONF
Is that clear enough.
Any question.
NOTE CONF
Just not like this.
You could go oh yeah I've seen that in a
NOTE CONF
Haskell before.
Some of you are nodding.
NOTE CONF
Some of you are asleep.
All right.
NOTE CONF
We'll move on.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now we can write a little program.
I'm going to write the program that just swaps the,
NOTE CONF
um, elements in a pair.
So this takes a pair, um, Z, which is a
NOTE CONF
B and a pair.
So be first followed by an a, and I'll compute
NOTE CONF
pi two of z.
So that's the second component that would have type a
NOTE CONF
and pi one of z.
That's the first component that will have type B, so
NOTE CONF
this returns a pair with the first components in A
and the second composed of b.
NOTE CONF
So that's an a b pair.
And you can see right I just explained all that
NOTE CONF
here.
But we can see the details right.
NOTE CONF
If z is a b a pair pi two of
z is an a pi one of z is a
NOTE CONF
b.
I can form pi two of z paired with pi
NOTE CONF
one of z.
That's an a and b, and I can discharge the
NOTE CONF
assumption.
So it's lambda z uh pi two z pi one,
NOTE CONF
z is a b, and a goes to a and
b function.
NOTE CONF
It just swaps things around.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We can evaluate programs, right.
So um, in Haskell we use lazy evaluation which essentially
NOTE CONF
says substitute term m for every occurrence of variable z.
So if we've got lambda z n applied to m,
NOTE CONF
why does I copy out n And with every occurrence
of Z replaced by M.
NOTE CONF
So we'll just take that variable z of type A
and replace it by the term m of type A.
NOTE CONF
And so now we've got n with every occurrence of
z replaced by m which has type b.
NOTE CONF
So notice this shows us that as we evaluate a
term it keeps the same type.
NOTE CONF
It started to type B.
It ends up at type B.
NOTE CONF
And similarly if I've got uh m and n form
a tuple m n a pair m n and I
NOTE CONF
project out the first component, what will that evaluate to?
I'm going to pick on the same person.
NOTE CONF
What will that evaluate to m right.
It'll just evaluate to m.
NOTE CONF
So we pick out the first component and Ms. type
A.
NOTE CONF
This has type A.
And when we're done.
NOTE CONF
It just evaluates to M, which has type A.
Uh, and in fact, uh, because you're always getting rid
NOTE CONF
of some things.
Right.
NOTE CONF
This is what we showed is that the type stays
the same.
NOTE CONF
So as you evaluate a type program, you still have
a type program.
NOTE CONF
And as you evaluate the type program, the types are
getting smaller.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We saw that the program might get bigger.
NOTE CONF
Right.
You might copy em many times, but the set of
NOTE CONF
type distinct types in the program is getting smaller because
before we had A implies B as one.
NOTE CONF
If you look at the multiset of types, this is
one of the multiset of types that appears in the
NOTE CONF
program before.
But after we've reduced, that's gotten rid, that's gone from
NOTE CONF
the multiset of types.
And the multiset of types that appears in the program
NOTE CONF
is finite.
So it must always be getting smaller.
NOTE CONF
So programs must terminate.
So that argument was first written down by Alan Turing.
NOTE CONF
Um, and in fact, it's that property that guarantees that
simply type lambda calculus is a good way of formulating,
NOTE CONF
uh, it can be used as a meta language for
logic, but we'll see.
NOTE CONF
It's closer to logic than that.
Um, so now, right, we can look at evaluating a
NOTE CONF
program which we know is guaranteed to terminate.
And.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So here is our swap program applied to a tuple
NOTE CONF
and followed by M.
So if we evaluate this right we take NM and
NOTE CONF
we replace z by NMN.
So now we've got this.
NOTE CONF
And now when we take pi two of an NMN
pair will get m and we take pi one we
NOTE CONF
get n.
So the program.
NOTE CONF
So swap apply to an NM pair.
Returns an min pair.
NOTE CONF
So we've swapped the components we started with NM and
we get back min.
NOTE CONF
So this second thing I showed you might have looked
a little bit similar to the first thing I showed
NOTE CONF
you.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And in fact it's let's see it's exactly identical.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not sure if um facilities has said time
to do this.
NOTE CONF
Dawn, did you talk to them in time?
So.
NOTE CONF
Well, I'm sorry.
What was supposed to happen is that you could reach
NOTE CONF
under your seat and pull out a pair of rose
coloured glasses.
NOTE CONF
So I want you to pretend that you're wearing rose
coloured glasses.
NOTE CONF
Of course, if you're wearing rose coloured glasses, you won't
see all this stuff in red.
NOTE CONF
it will vanish and you'll just be left with the
blue.
NOTE CONF
And indeed, if you take this set of slides with
everything in red and blue and compare it to what
NOTE CONF
we had here, it's the same, right?
All the blue stuff here got augmented into red and
NOTE CONF
blue stuff here.
And what does that mean?
NOTE CONF
What that means is all this stuff in red is
basically writing out in a term form, the proof this
NOTE CONF
term, right written out here linearly stands for this whole
tree.
NOTE CONF
That is the proof of A and b.
And in general the red stuff the terms is just
NOTE CONF
another notation for proofs.
You can think of the proofs as proof trees or
NOTE CONF
parse trees of terms or just as terms.
So we've got this very strong correspondence where the blue
NOTE CONF
stuff in logic is formulas of the logic, propositions, statements
that can be true or false.
NOTE CONF
And the red stuff is proofs.
So, um, a formula in logic corresponds to a type
NOTE CONF
in a type programming language like simply type lambda calculus
or Haskell.
NOTE CONF
A.
Proof in the logic corresponds to a term in the
NOTE CONF
programming language.
And most importantly, right.
NOTE CONF
There's a lot of structure preserved here because simplifying a
proof corresponds to evaluating a program.
NOTE CONF
So we have propositions as types, proofs as programs, and
simplification of proofs as normalisation of programs.
NOTE CONF
Evaluating a program.
Mhm.
NOTE CONF
So this is sometimes called the Cory Howard isomorphism.
Uh and write for programming languages with types.
NOTE CONF
We often write out arrow times plus and bottom.
But in logic the corresponding things are implies which we
NOTE CONF
wrote that way and which we wrote as an ampersand,
by the way.
NOTE CONF
Right.
People often do it with this and this, but this
NOTE CONF
is horrible, right?
You stand on your head and you can't tell what's
NOTE CONF
going on, but you can very easily confuse and and
ors.
NOTE CONF
Um, so it's much better in fact.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Ampersand for this one and or for this one.
And, um, Jensen knew that.
NOTE CONF
But we seem to have forgotten it these days.
But in fact, ampersand for this one and the wed,
NOTE CONF
the V symbol for that one is a good choice,
just as a matter of design that makes it easy
NOTE CONF
for people to read.
Um, so anyhow, this corresponds to um, wedge or ampersand.
NOTE CONF
This corresponds to V and this corresponds to false.
And it's called the Cary Howard correspondence, because a variant
NOTE CONF
of it was discovered by Haskell Curry, the same person
that Haskell is named after, and the same person.
NOTE CONF
The currying is named after, uh, in the 1930s, William
Howard, much later in the 1970s, wrote this out first
NOTE CONF
for simply typed lambda calculus.
Just what I've shown you, and then said, well, what
NOTE CONF
happens with the rest of logic?
Is there also a programming language that corresponds to the
NOTE CONF
rest of logic?
And he discovered what's called dependent types.
NOTE CONF
And dependent types are important because they show up in
what, uh, lots of proof assistance that we use today.
NOTE CONF
So, um, this was published in 1980, but he actually
discovered it in the early 1970s and then published it
NOTE CONF
in 1980.
In a festschrift devoted to, um, Haskell Curry on his
NOTE CONF
80th birthday.
So.
NOTE CONF
Right, we've got the Curry Howard correspondence, propositions as types,
proofs as programs, and normalisation of proofs as evaluation of
NOTE CONF
programs.
And the interesting thing is, the first time I saw
NOTE CONF
this, I thought, oh, that's just a cute little trick.
But it turns out it applies not just to natural
NOTE CONF
deduction and simply type lambda calculus.
But the same thing works for polymorphic types like we
NOTE CONF
have in Haskell.
The Hindley Miller type system, which was in fact discovered
NOTE CONF
once by the logician Hindley and once by the computer
scientist Milner.
NOTE CONF
There's a more general system called system F, which again
was discovered once by a logician and once by a
NOTE CONF
computer scientist.
Basically, what this says is it's a double barrelled name,
NOTE CONF
Curry Howard, which predicts the existence of other double barrelled
names.
NOTE CONF
It says every good idea will be discovered twice, once
by a logician and once by a computer scientist, because
NOTE CONF
they're doing the exact same thing.
And it turns out that pretty much every interesting logic
NOTE CONF
has an interesting corresponding programming language, and vice versa.
Um, there's sort of a very important exception to this,
NOTE CONF
which is concurrent programming.
There are lots of processed algebras for doing concurrent programming,
NOTE CONF
but nobody knows which one corresponds really neatly to a
logic yet.
NOTE CONF
There's a lot of work on what's called session types
and linear logic, which may be a form of the
NOTE CONF
answer, but I think the actual answer is something that
maybe somebody here will discover one day.
NOTE CONF
So right, there are lots of functional languages.
You've learned Haskell, but there are many, many others, and
NOTE CONF
there are lots of proof assistants.
So um, the first two were auto math and type
NOTE CONF
theory done by Matt and Love, based on write in
1975.
NOTE CONF
I told you Howard did his work in the early
1970s.
NOTE CONF
He showed it to Matt and Luff, and then Matt
and Luff came up with type theory.
NOTE CONF
So this is a way of saying, this is the
way we should think of proofs as terms and the
NOTE CONF
appropriate dependently typed programming language.
And then there were many, many other proofs systems that
NOTE CONF
came since one of the important ones was MGL, LCF,
which was done here at Edinburgh by Robin Milner.
NOTE CONF
He used to be a professor.
I hold the chair he used to sit in.
NOTE CONF
That was why I came here.
I couldn't turn down being offered that chair.
NOTE CONF
And MLK, of course, part of that is ML, which
is one of the early functional programming languages.
NOTE CONF
It was the first one that was tight.
And then Haskell came along because we were we were
NOTE CONF
all in Glasgow at the time, or most of us
were.
NOTE CONF
And we looked across what was going on here in
Edinburgh and we said, oh, that type system is neat.
NOTE CONF
Let's do a lazy, functional language that has that type
system.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So one of the important things, right, if you have
NOTE CONF
a good idea, other people will pick up and use
that good idea.
NOTE CONF
The the trick is to make your idea simple enough
that other people can understand it and pick it up
NOTE CONF
and use it.
So I'm going to conclude with just two minutes with
NOTE CONF
I normally stay away from philosophy.
But we saw philosophy was very important to Turing getting
NOTE CONF
his work accepted.
So I'm just going to do a tiny bit of
NOTE CONF
philosophy.
So, right.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes we want to talk to aliens, right.
We've actually done this.
NOTE CONF
So this is the the Voyager.
This is a plaque that appears on the Voyager satellite.
NOTE CONF
And this shows you where Voyager went.
Right.
NOTE CONF
There's the sun, there's a Venus, sorry, Mercury and Venus
and Earth, and it left Earth and swings around the
NOTE CONF
sun and Jupiter in between Jupiter and Saturn, and then
leaves the solar system.
NOTE CONF
So in case any aliens find it, hopefully they can
look at this and work out what's going on.
NOTE CONF
This is showing a bunch of quasars, and they're the
frequency in which hydrogen, um, vibrates when you look at
NOTE CONF
these different quasars.
And then the length of the line is the distance
NOTE CONF
from those quasars to sol to where this satellite originated
from.
NOTE CONF
And then there are pictures of people on it.
Now, depending on the aliens that see this right, they
NOTE CONF
may look at this and go, um, right.
They'll probably work out.
NOTE CONF
Length of a line means distance.
These are written in binary.
NOTE CONF
They can probably work out that binary means numbers.
Maybe they can work out the schematic of the solar
NOTE CONF
system.
They'll look at this and either go, that's a bunch
NOTE CONF
of weird lines, or maybe they'll look right.
If Star Trek is right, they'll look at it and
NOTE CONF
go, oh, they're just like us.
Except they don't have pubic hair.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so if we talk to aliens, right, they might
understand.
NOTE CONF
They might understand some of it.
They might not understand all of it.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Length of a line, probably understand drawing.
NOTE CONF
Maybe they'll understand.
Maybe not in how many people have seen the.
NOTE CONF
It's quite old now Independence Day.
So in this they, um, uh, destroy all the aliens
NOTE CONF
by giving them a virus.
The virus is written in C.
NOTE CONF
Well, actually, Java had come out then, but I'm pretty
sure it wasn't in Java because Java had not yet
NOTE CONF
spread through the known universe.
But they give they send them a virus written in
NOTE CONF
C that then destroys the aliens.
If we sent aliens something written in C, would they
NOTE CONF
even be able to figure out what it means?
Right?
NOTE CONF
Maybe it would be like length of lines, but more
likely it's like this, right?
NOTE CONF
It's like, what is this stuff?
All right.
NOTE CONF
So if we sent them something written in C, they
probably wouldn't understand it.
NOTE CONF
But what if we sent them something written in lambda
calculus?
NOTE CONF
Would they understand that?
So should we call lambda calculus the universal programming language
NOTE CONF
because it's something that aliens would understand.
Well, these days, I first gave this talk, I had
NOTE CONF
to explain what multiverses are.
Now, you've all seen the Marvel films.
NOTE CONF
You know what multiverses are.
And right, scientists actually talk about this.
NOTE CONF
It's like, it turns out that the different forces in
our universe, like the weak electromagnetic force, is just strong
NOTE CONF
enough to keep matter together.
If it was a little stronger, everything would collapse.
NOTE CONF
You wouldn't have atoms.
It's a little bit weaker.
NOTE CONF
The electrons would fly away.
You wouldn't have atoms.
NOTE CONF
So they say, well, why is it that the force
is exactly right for matter to exist?
NOTE CONF
They say, well, it's because we're here to see it.
There are other universes where it's stronger or weaker, but
NOTE CONF
we're not there to see it in our universe.
We're there to see it.
NOTE CONF
It's just right to have matter.
So scientists actually reason about multiverses a bit.
NOTE CONF
Now, in a multiverse, you might have different weak electromagnetic
force.
NOTE CONF
You might have, um, different strength of gravity.
Right?
NOTE CONF
Different gravitational constant.
One thing I think you will not have different is
NOTE CONF
the laws of logic.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Logic goes beyond the universe.
It goes across multiverses.
NOTE CONF
Maybe there are multiverses with different logic, but my imagination
is not great enough to consult them.
NOTE CONF
So what does that mean?
That means we cannot call lambda calculus the universal programming
NOTE CONF
language.
Why can we not call it the universal programming language?
NOTE CONF
Because doing so is too limiting.
So I will stop there.
NOTE CONF
I just want to leave you with one thought, right?
You've learned about Haskell, which is very practical language, but
NOTE CONF
one thing that makes it work so well is that
it's based on lambda calculus, which, as we've seen, is
NOTE CONF
very simple.
Um, something that was basically independently discovered three times because
NOTE CONF
computation was discovered three times, and lambda calculus is a
model of computation.
NOTE CONF
And what I want you to go away with is
the thought that if you have a tough job to
NOTE CONF
do, you should think that this is a job for
lambda calculus.
NOTE CONF
I will stop there.
Thank you very much.
NOTE CONF
So.